A Methodology for Collecting and Analyzing Social Media Data
The ease of use of social networks, whether on a personal computer or through smartphone apps, coupled with increasingly effective algorithms in showing people their interests, has made the social networks nowadays even used by people who did not have so much contact with technology, such as senior citizens, for example. This growth in the number of users of social networks has provoked a revolution in the way people communicate, interact and, consequently, influence the opinions expressed in those environments. This was quickly perceived by the most diverse types of organizations, who came to seek in this electronic environment ways to reach new customers interested in consuming their products or services. Many of these organizations have sectors responsible for updating their profiles or pages in social networks with the news, creating several publications daily. In addition, to better understand the target audience, their wishes and their opinions about existing products and services, as well as the image of the organization vis-à-vis network users, it is necessary to analyze the available data. Currently there are several studies on how to analyze the content of these publications, because they are in natural language and have in many cases complex elements such as irony or sarcasm, while there are few works in Portuguese that are aimed at beginners. For this reason, this work aims to help researchers who want to start working in this area, bringing some of the main concepts involved, as well as their practical application, through the definition of a method for collecting and analyzing the data. As results of the work, we highlight the detailed collection and exemplification of the use of available libraries for the data collection of two of the main social networks of the present time, as well as of tools available for the analysis of the data collected. Throughout this process, it was also necessary to construct specific codes to filter the desired data and convert output formats from applications of collect to input formats of analysis tools, obtaining the steps that now can be easily understood and replicated by other researchers in their work, even if they do not have prior experience in the field.
Data collect, Social networks, Data analysis, Sentiment Analysis.